---
title: Minecraft 1.21.6
path: /migration/1.21.6
---

:::note
These migration notes cover only the changes made to Balm APIs. 

For Minecraft and mod-loader specific migrations, check out their respective release announcements or primers.
:::

## Overview

In Minecraft 1.21.6, Balm has cleaned up some method names and deprecated some serialization-related methods in favor of Minecraft's newer ValueInput and ValueOutput APIs.

## ⚠️ Known Issues

### `/balm export icons` is not yet functional

The command has not yet been updated to Minecraft's rendering changes.

## Minor Changes

### `BalmCapabilities.registerProvider` now takes a `Supplier<Set<BlockEntityType<?>>>` instead of `Supplier<List<BlockEntityType<?>>>`

This change was made because passed in types should be unique.

### `BalmEnvironment.SERVER` has been renamed to `BalmEnvironment.DEDICATED_SERVER`

This change was made to avoid confusion with logical sides (i.e. ClientLevel vs ServerLevel).

### `BalmRenderers.setBlockRenderType` now takes a `ChunkSectionLayer` instead of `RenderType`

This is to align with Minecraft's API changes.

### `BalmBlockEntity.writeUpdateTag` now takes a `ValueOutput` instead of `CompoundTag`

This change was made to align with Minecraft's API changes.

## Deprecations

### `DefaultContainer.serialize` and `DefaultContainer.deserialize` have been deprecated

Use `net.minecraft.world.ContainerHelper#loadAllItems(ValueInput, NonNullList)` and `net.minecraft.world.ContainerHelper#saveAllItems(ValueOutput, NonNullList)` instead, which are identical.

### `ImplementedContainer.deserializeInventory` and `ImplementedContainer.serializeInventory` have been deprecated

Use `net.minecraft.world.ContainerHelper#loadAllItems(ValueInput, NonNullList)` and `net.minecraft.world.ContainerHelper#saveAllItems(ValueOutput, NonNullList)` instead, which are identical.

### `DefaultEnergyStorage.serialize()` and `DefaultEnergyStorage.deserialize()` have been deprecated

Use the methods of same name that take a `ValueOutput` or `ValueInput` instead. Note that, unlike the removed methods, these methods write into an `"Energy"` key instead of returning an `IntTag` directly. You may have to migrate data manually if you want to support upgrading older worlds.

### `DefaultFluidTank.serialize()` and `DefaultFluidTank.deserialize()` have been deprecated

Use the methods of same name that take a `ValueOutput` or `ValueInput` instead.

## Removals 

### `Balm.initialize` has been removed in favor of `Balm.initializeMod`

The methods are otherwise the same, this was just a name change for better clarity.

### `BalmClient.initialize` has been removed in favor of `BalmClient.initializeMod`

The methods are otherwise the same, this was just a name change for better clarity.

### `TickType.Entity` has been removed in favor of `TickType.ServerEntity` and `TickType.ClientEntity`

This change was made to match the other tick types in style.

### `SidedProxy.get()` has been removed in favor of `build` or `buildLazily`

This change makes the intent over when the proxy is initialized more clear.

### `ListUtils` has been removed

It was not used in Balm anymore and can easily be copied into individual projects if needed.