---
sidebar_position: -20250325
---

# Minecraft 1.21.5

:::info
These migration notes cover only the changes made to Balm APIs. 

For Minecraft and mod-loader specific migrations, check out their respective release announcements or primers.
:::

## Overview

In Minecraft 1.21.5, Balm has removed some long-standing deprecations, and refactored the way configs and capabilities are handled.

## ⚠️ Known Issues

### Extra Models are missing on Fabric

Fabric has not yet re-added the API for loading extra models. Balm defaults to the missing model so your code can at least run without crashing.

### `/balm export icons` is not yet functional

The command has not yet been updated to Minecraft's rendering changes.

## Notable Additions and Changes

### `BalmModule` and `BalmClientModule`, an alternative way to initialize your mods

Modules are a slightly cleaner way of interacting with Balm, where instead of accessing Balm services through the `Balm` helper class in your initializer, you instead override the appropriate `register*` method in your module and have it called by Balm at the appropriate time.

Read through the [Modules](../concepts/modules.md) documentation to learn more.

### `BalmConfigSchema` for Declarative Configs

Configs have been refactored for a much cleaner and more stable code-base, while also adding the ability to define a configuration programmatically instead of only statically through annotations.

:::info[Annotation-based Configs]
The previous annotation-based approach is still present and will remain, however some packages and annotations have been renamed for clarity.
:::

Balm now also supports different config types, although only `common` and `client` are universally supported across all mod loaders.

:::tip
The changes to `BalmConfig` and Declarative Configs have been backported to 1.20.1, 1.21.1 and 1.21.4.
:::

#### `SyncConfigMessage` has been removed

Balm now automatically takes care of syncing mod's configs through its own packet. Mods no longer need to register a packet of their own.

#### Added `BalmConfigSchema` as an alternative way to define configs

Configs are now no longer directly tied to a given data class. Instead, their structure is defined in a schema, very similar to how config specs are built in Forge and NeoForge.

However, the annotation-based approach remains and will continue to function. Schemas will be auto-generated for annotation-based configs so both can use the same code in the back.

Read through the [Mod Configurations](../configuration) documentation for more information.

#### Renamed some packages for annotation-based configs

Annotations such as `@Config`, `@Comment` and `@Synced` are now available under the package `net.blay09.mods.balm.api.config.reflection`.

#### `ExpectedType` has been renamed to `NestedType`

The new name makes it more clear that the annotation is meant to be used for collections / generics.

#### `BalmConfigData` has been removed

The interface served no purpose beyond slightly better type-safety.

Since mods generally only access their config classes in two places (`registerConfig` and `getActiveConfig`) where errors are easy to notice, the interface has been removed for simplicity.

### `BalmCapabilities` replaces `BalmProviders`

The previous `BalmProviders` implementation was heavily biased towards Forge's approach to capabilities and had several shortcomings that resulted in a lot of mod-loader-specific boilerplate. It has been removed in favor the new `BalmCapabilities` service.

With this new service, it is now possible to universally register capabilities, capability providers, and fallback providers through Balm.

Read through the [Capabilities](../advanced/capabilities.md) documentation for more information.

:::tip
The new `BalmCapabilities` service has been backported to 1.20.1, 1.21.1 and 1.21.4.
:::

## Minor Changes

### `BalmModels.loadModel` now returns a `BlockStateModel`

`BlockStateModel` can be used in the same manner that `BakedModel` was, with the difference that you must use `collectParts(RandomSource)` to pass them into the `tesselateBlock` method.

:::warning
Extra Models are not currently supported on Fabric. They will always return the missing model.
:::

### `BalmRenderers` and `BalmScreens` registration methods now require a `ResourceLocation` identifier

While this identifier is not technically used by Minecraft or mod loaders, Balm needs it to attribute your objects to the appropriate mod.

As a side-effect, this should also be more future-proof since more and more things are moving to registries or at least being identifiable.


### `FluidTank` and `EnergyStorage` are now an interface

An interface was added as to not limit the respective Balm capabilities to only Balm's default implementation.

In return, the default implementation has been renamed to `DefaultFluidTank` and `DefaultEnergyStorage`.

If you are querying for a `FLUID_TANK` or `ENERGY_STORAGE` capability, you should handle the interface under the same name as previously.

If you are defining your own fluid tank or energy storage, you should use `DefaultFluidTank` and `DefaultEnergyStorage` or a custom implementation.

### `isConnectedToServer` has been renamed to `isConnected`

This method is available through `Balm.getProxy()` and can be used before sending packets to ensure they are only sent if the player is actually ingame.

This was changed to avoid confusion on what this method does. Unlike the previous name may have suggested, it is not the equivalent of an `isMultiplayer()` method. 

`isConnected` checks if the client is connected to any server, be it the integrated singleplayer server, a LAN server, or a dedicated server.

## Caveats

### `Balm.registerConfig` may not load your config immediately anymore

On Forge and NeoForge, `common` and `client` configs are no longer immediately available. Accessing the config in your initializer will result in a crash. You can instead use the new `ConfigLoadedEvent` to act only once the config is available. 

However, that may be too late if you need access to the configuration for e.g. setting up item components. **There is no good universal solution to this as of now.**

### Reload Listeners can no longer be added directly to `ReloadableResourceManager`

Adding reload listeners to the `ReloadableResourceManager` directly is no longer supported, as NeoForge had made the list immutable in favor of their registration event.

Balm now provides an `addResourceReloadListener` method that uses the proper channels to register the listener on each mod loader.

Functionally, this method behaves the same as registering a reload listener directly used to.

## Removals 

### Removals in `BalmBlocks`

#### `blockProperties()` has been removed

Block Properties now require an identifier to be set, and mod-loader specific `BlockBehaviour.Properties` no longer exist, making this method obsolete. Instead, there is now a static `blockProperties(ResourceLocation)` utility method you can use.

#### `registerBlock(Supplier, ResourceLocation)` has been removed

Use `registerBlock(Function, ResourceLocation)` instead, which gives you access to the identifier you passed in (since you'll need it to construct your block properties).

#### `registerBlockItem(Supplier, ResourceLocation)` and `registerBlockItem(Supplier, ResourceLocation, ResourceLocation)` has been removed

Use `registerBlockItem(Function, ResourceLocation)` or `registerBlockItem(Function, ResourceLocation, ResourceLocation)` instead, which gives you access to the identifier you passed in (since you'll need it to construct your item properties).

#### `register(Supplier, Supplier, ResourceLocation)` and `register(Supplier, Supplier, ResourceLocation, ResourceLocation)` has been removed

Use `register(Function, BiFunction, ResourceLocation)` or `register(Function, BiFunction, ResourceLocation, ResourceLocation)` instead, which gives you access to the identifier you passed in, since you'll need it to construct your block and item properties.

Additionally, the `BiFunction` for your block item also gets the constructed block passed in, simplifying registration further.

### Removals in `BalmItems`

#### `itemProperties()` has been removed

Item Properties now require an identifier to be set, and mod-loader specific `Item.Properties` no longer exist, making this method obsolete. Instead, there is now a static `itemProperties(ResourceLocation)` utility method you can use.

#### `registerItem(Supplier, ResourceLocation)` and  `registerItem(Supplier, ResourceLocation, ResourceLocation)` has been removed

Use `registerItem(Function, ResourceLocation)` or `registerItem(Function, ResourceLocation, ResourceLocation)` instead, which gives you access to the identifier you passed in (since you'll need it to construct your item properties).

### Removals in `BalmNetworking`

#### `openGui` has been removed in favor of `openMenu`

The new method name more accurately describes what the method does and is functionally identical.

#### `registerClientboundPacket` that takes `Consumer` and `Function` for encoding and decoding has been removed

Minecraft is migrating its network protocol to use `StreamCodec`s, which are a composable way of declaring the structure of the data that gets sent and received.

You can still use `StreamCodec.of(encoder, decoder)` to create a `StreamCodec` with imperative code, although it is recommended to migrate to using `StreamCodec.composite(...)`, as this declarative approach is less error-prone.

### Removals in `BalmHooks` 

#### `getBurnTime` has been removed

You can instead use `level.fuelValues().burnDuration(itemStack)`.

#### `isShield` has been removed

You can instead check for the `DataComponents.BLOCKS_ATTACKS` data components.

#### `isRepairable` has been removed

You can instead check for the `DataComponents.REPAIRABLE` or `DataComponents.REPAIR_COST` data components.

#### `getBlockReachDistance` has been removed

You can instead query the `Attributes.BLOCK_INTERACTION_RANGE` attribute.

### Removals in `BalmRegistries`

#### `getKey`, `getItemKeys` and `getItem`/... has been removed

These methods are all available through the respective registry in `BuiltinRegistries` instead.

#### `getItemTag` has been removed

You can instead easily create a `TagKey<Item>` yourself:

```java
TagKey<Item> yourTag = TagKey.create(Registries.ITEM, yourResourceLocation);
```

### Removals in `BalmKeyMappings`

#### Registration methods taking `KeyConflictContext` and `KeyModifier` have been removed

Kuma is the preferred solution for dealing with special key mappings, which allows defining defaults as well as fallbacks should key modifiers not be supported by the mod loader.

Kuma is already embedded in Balm, so you can safely depend on it without needing to jar-in-jar it.

#### Modifier- and Context-aware `isActive*` methods have been removed

Since Balm no longer provides the functionality for key conflict contexts and modifiers, you can now just use the existing methods from the `KeyMapping` to check for its state.

If you use Kuma, you can access the state on the `ManagedKeyMapping`, or use the event handlers when registering your keys to define your logic.

#### `ignoreConflicts(KeyMapping)` and related methods have been removed

These methods were added to allow configuring key modifiers through dummy key mappings, but they were never really functional due to Minecraft's limitation of only supporting an input to be bound to a single key. In prior Balm versions, these methods already no-op'ed.

#### `KeyConflictContext`, `KeyModifier` and `KeyModifiers` have been removed

If you were using these classes, you should instead use Kuma or define your own.

### Removals in `BalmRecipes`

#### `registerRecipeType` that takes both RecipeType and RecipeSerializer has been removed

Use `registerRecipeType` and `registerRecipeSerializer` individually instead.

### Removal of `BalmTextures`

This class was already empty and has not been needed for a while, since custom textures can be added to atlases through resource packs.

### Removal of `ExtractionAwareContainer`

This interface was highly incompatible with other mods as the extraction checks were only performed when Balm's own `ContainerUtils` were used.

Instead, you should implement Vanilla's `Container.canTakeItem` or `WorldlyContainer.canTakeItemThroughFace` in your container.
