---
sidebar_position: -20240811
---

# Minecraft 1.21.1

:::info
These migration notes cover only the changes made to Balm APIs. 

For Minecraft and mod-loader specific migrations, check out their respective release announcements or primers.
:::

## Overview

Balm for Minecraft 1.21.1 has introduced load contexts, an object that you must pass to `initializeMod` and differs per loader.

## Notable Additions and Changes

### Load Contexts

Balm now requires a load context to be passed in when calling `initializeMod` in your entrypoints.

On Fabric and Forge, you can simply pass `EmptyLoadContext.INSTANCE` when calling `initializeMod`.

On NeoForge, you must pass a `NeoForgeLoadContext` which holds the mod event bus that was passed into the constructor of your NeoForge entrypoint.

```java title="Example on Fabric"
@Override
public void onInitialize() {
    Balm.initializeMod(Waystones.MOD_ID, EmptyLoadContext.INSTANCE, Waystones::initialize);
}
```

```java title="Example on NeoForge"
public NeoForgeWaystones(IEventBus modEventBus) {
    final var context = new NeoForgeLoadContext(modEventBus);
    Balm.initializeMod(Waystones.MOD_ID, context, Waystones::initialize);
}
```

### Changes to Registering Network Packets

To align with Vanilla, the encoder in `registerClientboundPacket` has had its parameters swapped. It is now a `BiConsumer<RegistryFriendlyByteBuf, T>` where `T` is your packet object.

Minecraft is also migrating its network protocol to use `StreamCodec`s, which are a composable way of declaring the structure of the data that gets sent and received. Therefore, the old methods that took a decoder and encoder function have been deprecated.

You can still use `StreamCodec.of(encoder, decoder)` to create a `StreamCodec` with imperative code, although it is recommended to migrate to using `StreamCodec.composite(...)`, as this declarative approach is less error-prone.